PREAMBLE

Whereas sovereignty over the entire Universe belongs to Almighty Allah alone, and the authority to be exercised by the people of Pakistan within the limits prescribed by Him is a sacred trust;

And whereas it is the will of the people of Pakistan to establish an order;

Wherein the State shall exercise its powers and authority through the chosen representatives of the people;

Wherein the principles of democracy, freedom, equality, tolerance and social justice, as enunciated by Islam, shall be fully observed;

...

PART I: Introductory

1. The Republic and its territories.—
(1) Pakistan shall be a Federal Republic to be known as the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, hereinafter referred to as Pakistan.
(2) The territories of Pakistan shall comprise:—
  (a) the Provinces of Balochistan, the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, the Punjab and Sindh;
  (b) the Islamabad Capital Territory, hereinafter referred to as the Federal Capital;
  (c) such States and territories as are or may be included in Pakistan, whether by accession or otherwise; and
  (d) such other territories as may be included in Pakistan.

2. Islam to be State religion.—
Islam shall be the State religion of Pakistan.

2A. The Objectives Resolution to form part of substantive provisions.—
The principles and provisions set out in the Objectives Resolution reproduced in the Annex are hereby made substantive part of the Constitution and shall have effect accordingly.

3. Elimination of exploitation.—
The State shall ensure the elimination of all forms of exploitation and the gradual fulfillment of the fundamental principle, from each according to his ability to each according to his work.

4. Right of individuals to be dealt with in accordance with law.—
(1) To enjoy the protection of law and to be treated in accordance with law is the inalienable right of every citizen, wherever he may be, and of every other person for the time being within Pakistan.

(2) In particular:—
  (a) no action detrimental to the life, liberty, body, reputation or property of any person shall be taken except in accordance with law;
  (b) no person shall be prevented from or be hindered in doing that which is not prohibited by law; and
  (c) no person shall be compelled to do that which the law does not require him to do.

5. Loyalty to State and obedience to Constitution and law.—
(1) Loyalty to the State is the basic duty of every citizen.
(2) Obedience to the Constitution and law is the obligation of every citizen wherever he may be and of every other person for the time being within Pakistan.

6. High treason.—
(1) Any person who abrogates or subverts or suspends or holds in abeyance, or attempts or conspires to abrogate or subvert or suspend or hold in abeyance, the Constitution by use of force or show of force or by other unconstitutional means shall be guilty of high treason.
(2) Any person aiding or abetting or collaborating the acts mentioned in clause (1) shall likewise be guilty of high treason.
(3) [Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] shall by law provide for the punishment of persons found guilty of high treason.

PART II: Fundamental Rights and Principles of Policy

CHAPTER 1: FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS

7. Definition of the State.— In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, “the State” means the Federal Government, Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament), a Provincial Government, a Provincial Assembly, and such local or other authorities in Pakistan as are by law empowered to impose any tax or cess.

8. Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of Fundamental Rights to be void.—
(1) Any law, or any custom or usage having the force of law, in so far as it is inconsistent with the rights conferred by this Chapter, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.

...

13. Protection against double punishment and self-incrimination.
14. Inviolability of dignity of man, etc.
15. Freedom of movement, etc.
16. Freedom of assembly.
17. Freedom of association.
18. Freedom of trade, business or profession.
19. Freedom of speech, etc.
19A. Right to information.
20. Freedom to profess religion and to manage religious institutions.
...

25. Equality of citizens.—
(1) All citizens are equal before law and are entitled to equal protection of law.
(2) There shall be no discrimination on the basis of sex.
(3) Nothing in this Article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for the protection of women and children.

25A. Right to education.— The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of five to sixteen years in such manner as may be determined by law.

...

CHAPTER 2: PRINCIPLES OF POLICY

29. Principles of Policy.— The Principles set out in this Chapter are not enforceable by any court, but are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the State.

30. Responsibility with respect to Principles of Policy.—
(1) The responsibility of ensuring compliance with the Principles of Policy shall be that of each organ and authority of the State and of each person performing functions on behalf of an organ or authority of the State.

...

34. Full participation of women in national life.
35. Protection of family, etc.
36. Protection of minorities.
37. Promotion of social justice and eradication of social evils.
38. Promotion of social and economic well-being of the people.
...

PART III: The Federation of Pakistan

CHAPTER 1: THE PRESIDENT

41. The President.—
(1) There shall be a President of Pakistan who shall be the Head of State and shall represent the unity of the Republic.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for election as President unless he is a Muslim of not less than forty-five years of age and is qualified to be elected as a member of the National Assembly.

...

CHAPTER 2: THE MAJLIS-E-SHOORA (PARLIAMENT)

50. Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament).— There shall be a Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) of Pakistan consisting of the President and two Houses to be known respectively as the National Assembly and the Senate.

...

CHAPTER 3: PROCEDURE GENERALLY

66. Privileges of members, etc.
67. Rules of procedure, etc.
68. Restriction on discussion in Majlis-e-Shoora.
...

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT

90. The Executive Authority of the Federation.
91. The Cabinet.
92. Federal Ministers and Ministers of State.
93. Advisers.
...
